A mixture is what happens when substances are together,
but not chemically rebuilt into one new substance.
Think of cereal and milk. The cereal is still cereal. The
milk is still milk.
That is different from a compound. In a compound, atoms of
different elements are chemically joined in a fixed
arrangement.
Water is not a loose pile of hydrogen and oxygen. It is a
new substance with its own properties.
Mixtures can be obvious: sand and pebbles, cereal and
milk, paper clips and rice.
Some mixtures are less obvious. Salt water looks clear,
but salt particles are spread through the water. That kind
of mixture is a solution.
Dissolved does not mean gone. If sugar dissolves in water,
the sweetness tells you the sugar is still there.
Dissolving sugar is a physical change. The sugar is spread
out, not rebuilt into a new substance.
Chemists separate mixtures by using properties.
If pieces are different sizes, use sieving. A sieve can
separate pebbles from sand because the holes care about
size.
If an insoluble solid is mixed with a liquid, use
filtering. Filter paper can catch sand from muddy water.
But filtering will not remove dissolved salt from water.
The salt particles are too spread out and too small for
normal filter paper to catch.
For salt water, use evaporation. Let the water leave as
vapour, and the salt can be left behind.
If one part is magnetic, use a magnet. A magnet can pull
iron filings from sand. It will not help with rice,
because rice is not secretly metal.
Another useful word is soluble. A soluble substance can
dissolve in a liquid. Salt is soluble in water. Sand is
insoluble in water, which is why it can be caught by a
If a mixture has a liquid sitting above a solid, sometimes
you can pour the liquid off carefully. That is called
decanting. It is not as precise as filtering, but it is a
For coloured inks or dyes, chemists can use
chromatography. The colours travel different distances
through paper because they interact with the paper and
Sometimes you need a sequence. Imagine a mixture of sand,
salt, and iron filings. First use a magnet for the iron.
Then add water to dissolve the salt. Filter out the sand.
That sounds like several steps because the mixture has
several different properties to exploit. Size, solubility,
and magnetism each give you a different handle.
This is why one magic separation tool does not exist. A
filter is brilliant for muddy water and useless for
dissolved salt. A magnet is brilliant for iron and deeply
A solution can still be a mixture even when it looks
uniform. Clear salt water does not show separate grains,
but the salt particles are still present throughout the
A saturated solution is what happens when the water cannot
dissolve more of that substance at that temperature. Extra
solid may sit at the bottom, not because chemistry gave
So separation is a planning problem. Identify the parts,
list their properties, then pick the method that uses the
biggest useful difference between them.
The separation question is: what property lets me separate
these parts?